<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Dies Irae</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="dies-irae" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Dies Irae</h2>
			<section id="dies-irae-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Chant the First</h3>
				<section id="dies-irae-1-1" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h4>
					<p>… This free song of the stern days of justice and retribution I have composed myself, as well as I could, I, Geronimo Pascagna, a Sicilian bandit, murderer, highwayman, criminal.</p>
					<p>Having composed it to the best of my ability, I meant to sing it loudly, as good songs should be sung, but my jailer would not allow it. My jailer’s ear is overgrown with hair; it has a strait and a narrow channel: fit for words that are untruthful, sly, words that can crawl upon their bellies like reptiles. But my words walk erect, they have deep chests, broad backs⁠—ah, how painfully they tore at the tender ear of the jailer which was overgrown with hair!</p>
					<p>“If the ear is shut, seek another entrance, Geronimo,” I said to myself amicably; and I pondered, and I sought, and finally I succeeded and found it, for Geronimo is no fool, let me tell you. And this is what I found: I found a stone. And this is what I did: I chiseled my song into the stone, and with the blows of my wrath I set aflame its icy heart. And when the stone came to life and glanced at me with the fiery eyes of wrath, I cautiously took it away and placed it at the very edge of the prison wall.</p>
					<p>Can you not see what I have in mind? I am wise, I figure that a friendly quake will soon again set the earth aquiver, and once again it will destroy your city; and the walls will crumble, and my stone will drop and shatter the jailer’s head. And having shattered it, it will leave upon his soft waxy blood-grey brain the impress of my song of freedom, like the seal of a king, like a new commandment of wrath⁠—and thus will the jailer go down to his grave.</p>
					<p>I say, jailer, shut not your ear, for I shall enter through your skull!</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-1-2" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h4>
					<p>If I am then alive, I shall laugh with joy; and if I chance to be dead, my bones shall dance in their insecure grave. That will be a merry Tarantella!</p>
					<p>Can you say upon your oath that such things can never be? The same quake might cast me back upon the face of the earth: my rotting coffin, my decayed flesh, my whole body, dead and buried for keeps, tightly clamped down. For such things have happened upon great days: the earth opening up about the cemeteries, the still coffins crawling out into the light.</p>
					<p>Those still coffins, uninvited guests at the banquet!</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-1-3" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h4>
					<p>These be the names of the comrades with whom I made friends in those fleeting hours: Pascale, a professor; Giuseppe, Pincio, Alba. They were shot by firing squads. There was also another one, young, obliging, and so handsome. It was a pity to look at him. I esteemed him as a son, he reverenced me as a father, but I did not know his name. I had not chanced to ask him, or perhaps I have forgotten it. He, too, was shot by the soldiers. There may have been one or two more, also friends, I do not remember them. When the youngster was being put to death, I did not run far away, I hid right here, back of the wall⁠—now crumbled⁠—near the trampled cactus. I saw and heard everything. And when I started to leave, the trampled cactus pierced me with its thorn. Was it not planted near the wall to keep away the thieves? How faithful are the servants of the rich!</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-1-4" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h4>
					<p>The firing squad put them to death. Remember the names which I have mentioned; and with regard to those whom I have not mentioned by name, remember merely that they were put to death. But don’t go and make a sign of the cross upon your brow, or worse than that⁠—don’t go and order a requiem mass⁠—they did not like such things. Honor the dead with the silence of truth, and if you must lie, lie in some merrier fashion, but never by saying mass: they did not like that.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-1-5" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">V</h4>
					<p>That first quake that destroyed the prison and the city had a voice of rare power and of queer, superhuman dignity: it roared from below, from beneath the ground, it was vast and hoarse and menacing; and everything shook and crumbled. And ere I grasped what was going on, I knew that all was over, that it was perhaps the end of the earth. But I was not particularly frightened: why should I be especially frightened even if it were the end of the world? Long did he roar, that deaf subterranean trumpeter.</p>
					<p>And all at once politely opened the door.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-1-6" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VI</h4>
					<p>I had sat a long time in prison, without hope. I had tried to flee and failed. Nor could you have managed to escape, for that accursed prison was very well built.</p>
					<p>And I had become accustomed to the iron of the bars and to the stone of the walls, and they seemed to me eternal, and he who had built them the strongest in the world. And it was no use to think whether he was just or not, so strong and eternal he was. Even in my dreams I saw no freedom⁠—I did not believe, expect or feel it. And I feared to call it. It is perilous to call freedom; while you keep still, you may live; but call freedom once, ever so softly, you must either gain it or die. This is true, so said Pascale, the professor.</p>
					<p>And thus without hope I sat in prison, and suddenly opened the door. Politely and of its own accord. At any rate it was no human hand that opened it.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-1-7" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VII</h4>
					<p>The streets were in ruins, in a terrible chaos. All the material of which people build was resolved to its elements and lay as it had been in the beginning. The houses were crumbling, bursting, reeling like drunken, squatting down upon the ground, on their own crushed legs. Others were sulkily casting themselves down upon the ground, with their heads upon the pavement⁠—crash! And opened were the little boxes in which human beings live⁠—pretty little boxes, all plastered with paper. The pictures still hung on the walls, but the people were no more; they had been thrown out, they were lying beneath masses of stone. And the earth was twitching convulsively⁠—for, you must know that the subterranean trumpeter had started to roar again, that deaf devil who can never have enough noise because he is so deaf. Sweet, painstaking, gigantic devil!</p>
					<p>But I was free and I did not understand it yet. I hesitated to walk away from that accursed prison. I was standing there, blinking stupidly at the ruins. And the comrades had also assembled, none attempting to leave, crowding distractedly, like the children about the figure of a dissipated, drunken mother that had fallen to the ground. A fine mother, indeed!</p>
					<p>Suddenly Pascale, the professor, said:</p>
					<p>“Look!”</p>
					<p>One of the walls which we had deemed eternal had burst in two; and the window, with its iron bars, had split in two as well. The iron was twisted and torn like a rotten rag⁠—think of it, the iron! In my hands it had not even rattled, it had pretended to be eternal, the most powerful thing on earth, and now it was not worth to be spat upon⁠—the iron, think of it!</p>
					<p>Then I, and the rest of us, understood that we were free.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-1-8" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VIII</h4>
					<p>Free!</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-1-9" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IX</h4>
					<p>It is harder for you to bend a grass blade than for him to bend three iron rails one atop the other. Three or a hundred, it is all the same to him. It is more difficult for you to raise a cup of water to your lips than for him to raise a sea of water, to shake it up, to lift the dregs thereof and to cast them out upon the shore; to bring the cold to boiling. It is harder for you to gnaw through a piece of sugar than for him to gnaw through a mountain. It is more difficult for you to tear a thin and rotting thread than for him to break three wire ropes twisted into one braid. You will perspire and flush with exertion before you manage to stir up an anthill with your stick⁠—and he with one push destroys your city. He has picked up an iron steamship as you with your hand pick up a tiny pebble, and has cast it ashore⁠—have you ever seen the like of such strength?</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-1-10" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">X</h4>
					<p>All that had been open he has shut; the door of your house has grown into its walls, and together they have choked you: your door, your walls, your ceiling. And he likewise has opened the doors of the prison which you had shut so carefully.</p>
					<p>You, rich man, whom I hate!</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-1-11" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XI</h4>
					<p>If I gather from all over the world all the good words which people use, all the tender sayings, all the ringing songs and fling them all into the joyous air;</p>
					<p>If I gather all the smiles of children, the laughter of women whom none has yet wronged, the caresses of greyhaired mothers, the faithful handshakes of a friend⁠—and weave of them all an incorruptible wreath for some one beautiful head;</p>
					<p>If I pass over the face of the earth and garner all the flowers that grow upon it: in the forests and in the fields, in the meadows and in the gardens of the rich, in the depths of the waters, upon the azure bottom of the ocean; if I gather all the precious sparkling stones, bringing them forth out of hidden crevices, out of the gloomy depths of mines, tearing them from the crowns of kings and from the ears of the rich⁠—and pile them all, the stones and the flowers, into one radiant mountain;</p>
					<p>If I gather all the fires that burn in the universe, all the lights, all the rays, all the flashes, flares and silent glows, and in the glare of one mighty conflagration illumine the quaking worlds;</p>
					<p>Even then I shall be unable to name thee, to crown thee, to laud thee⁠—O Freedom!</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-1-12" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XII</h4>
					<p>Freedom!</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-1-13" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIII</h4>
					<p>Over my head was the sky, and the sky is always free, always open to the winds and to the movement of the clouds; under my feet was the road, and the road is always free; it was made to walk on, it was made for the feet to move over its surface, going back and forth, leaving one spot and finding another. The road is the sweetheart of him who is free; you have to kiss it on meeting, to weep over it on parting.</p>
					<p>And when my feet began to move upon the road, I thought that a miracle had occurred. I looked, and Pascale’s feet were also moving, the professor! I looked, and the youngster was also moving with youthful feet, hurrying, stumbling, and suddenly he ran.</p>
					<p>“Whither?”</p>
					<p>But Pascale sternly reproved me.</p>
					<p>“Don’t throw questions at him; you’ll break his limbs. For you and I are old, Geronimo.”</p>
					<p>And we wept. And suddenly the deaf trumpeter roared out anew.</p>
				</section>
			</section>
			<section id="dies-irae-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Chant the Second</h3>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-1" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h4>
					<p>A long time we walked about the city and saw much that was striking, strange and sinister.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-2" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h4>
					<p>Neither can you shut in the fire⁠—I was saying this, I, Geronimo Pascagna. If you would be at peace, put it out altogether, but do not lock it up in stone, in iron or in glass; it will escape, and your strongly built house will come to a bad end. When your mighty house is fallen, and your life is extinct, it alone will burn, retaining the heat and the blazing ruddiness and all the force of the flame. It may lie awhile on the ground, it may pretend even to be dead; then it will lift its head upon a slender neck and look about⁠—to the right and to the left, forward and backward. And it will leap. And it will hide again, and will look again, it will straighten up, throw back its head, and suddenly it will grow terribly stout.</p>
					<p>And it will no longer have one head upon one slender neck: it will have thousands. And it will no longer crawl slowly, it will run, it will make gigantic bounds. It had been silent, now it is singing, whistling, yelling, giving orders to stone and to iron, driving all from its path.</p>
					<p>And suddenly it will begin to circle.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-3" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h4>
					<p>We saw more dead people than living; and the dead were calm; they did not know what had happened to them, and they were calm. But what about the living? Just think what a ridiculous thing was told us by a madman for whom, too, in those days of stern equality the door had opened!</p>
					<p>Do you think he was amazed? He looked on attentively and benignly, and the grey stubble on his yellow face bristled with proud joy⁠—as though he had done it all himself. I do not like madmen, and was going to walk past him, but Pascale, the professor, stopped me, and respectfully asked the proud madman:</p>
					<p>“What makes you so pleased, signor?”</p>
					<p>Pascale was far from being short of stature, but the madman searched for him a long time with his eyes, like for a grain of sand that has suddenly spoken out aloud from amidst of a sand heap, and finally he discovered him. And hardly parting his lips⁠—so proud was he⁠—he repeated the question:</p>
					<p>“What makes me so pleased?”</p>
					<p>And he waved his hand majestically and said:</p>
					<p>“This is perfect order. We have so long craved for order.”</p>
					<p>He called that order! I laughed out aloud, but just at that moment a corpulent and altogether insane monk came up, and proved even more ridiculous.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-4" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h4>
					<p>For a long time they played their comedy among the ruins, the lunatic and the monk, while we sat on a heap of stones, laughing and encouraging them, shouting “bravo.”</p>
					<p>“Fraud! I have been deceived!” cried the fat monk.</p>
					<p>He was so fat, I don’t think you’ve ever seen anyone as fat. It was repulsive to watch him, the yellow fat of his cheeks and of his belly quivered and shook so with wrath and fear.</p>
					<p>“There’s perfect order for you!” cried the lunatic approvingly, hardly deigning to part his lips.</p>
					<p>“Fraud!” yelled the monk.</p>
					<p>And suddenly he commenced to curse God. The monk! Think of it!</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-5" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">V</h4>
					<hr/>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-6" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VI</h4>
					<p>He assured us all that God had deceived him and he wept. He swore like a crooked gambler that this was poor recompense for his prayers and his faith. He stamped his feet and he cursed like a mule driver who comes out of a gin mill and suddenly discovers that his mules had scattered to the four winds.</p>
					<p>And suddenly Pascale, the professor, lost his temper. He demanded that I give him my knife and said to the monk who had sat down for a rest after his outburst of curses:</p>
					<p>“Listen, in a minute I will slit your belly, and if I find there but one drop of wine or one atom of a pullet. …”</p>
					<p>“And if you don’t?” angrily retorted the monk.</p>
					<p>“Then we shall count you among the saints. Hold his legs, Geronimo!”</p>
					<p>The monk was frightened and departed mumbling:</p>
					<p>“And I thought you were Christians! Blasphemy! Blasphemy!”</p>
					<p>But the lunatic gazed after him benignly and spoke approvingly:</p>
					<p>“This is what I call perfect order. We have been so long waiting for perfect order.”</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-7" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VII</h4>
					<p>And we walked a long time about the city and saw many odd things. But the day was short, and the night fell upon earth earlier than ever before; and when the firing squad was killing Pascale, the soldiers had lighted their torches.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-8" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VIII</h4>
					<p>When Pascale was put against the wall, against the portion of it which had remained uninjured, and the soldiers raised their rifles, the officer said to him:</p>
					<p>“You will die in a moment. Tell me why are you not afraid? That which has happened is terrible, and we are all pale with horror, but you are not. Why is that?”</p>
					<p>Pascale was silent; he waited for the officer to ask him more questions so that he might reply to all of them in one.</p>
					<p>“And whence comes your boldness: to stoop and to take that which belongs to others at a time when people in terror forget even themselves and their children? And are you not sorry for those women and children who have perished? We have seen cats that have lost their mind through terror, and you are a human being. I will have you shot instantly.”</p>
					<p>This was well spoken, but our Pascale could speak every bit as well. He has been shot dead. He is dead, but some day when all the dead arise you will hear his speech, and you will shed tears, if by that time all the tears are not exhausted, O Man.</p>
					<p>He said:</p>
					<p>“I take that which is another’s because I have nothing that is my own. I took the raiment off a dead man in order to clothe my living flesh, but you have seen me do it, and so you have stripped me; and now I stand naked in front of your rifles. Soldiers, fire!”</p>
					<p>But the officer did not suffer them to fire and asked him to speak further.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-9" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IX</h4>
					<p>“Naked I stand in front of your rifles and fear nothing, not even your rifles. But you are pale with fear, and you fear everything, even your own rifles, even my naked body. When the quake was heard, it destroyed and killed your city, your fortunes, your children and wives⁠—but it opened a prison for me. What then shall I fear? I have nothing of my own upon the face of the earth. I am, naked.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-10" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">X</h4>
					<p>“And if the whole earth crumbled into ruin, and the very beasts howled with horror, and the fish found a voice to express their grief, and the birds fell to the ground with dread, even then I would not fear. For all others it means the ruin of the earth, for me it opens the doors of a prison. What then shall I fear? I am naked.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-11" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XI</h4>
					<p>“And if the universe crumbled, with heaven and hell, and horror were enthroned over the infinity of living creatures, even then I would know no fear. For all it would be the end of the universe, for me the opening of a prison. What then shall I fear? I am naked.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-12" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XII</h4>
					<p>“And now, when with one salvo of your rifles you will destroy for me the earth and the universe, even now I know no fear. For all of you it will be the destruction and the fall of a human body, but for me a prison will open its gates. Soldiers, fire! I am naked.”</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-13" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIII</h4>
					<p>The torches blazed. It was the shortest day which I had ever seen. Night fell upon the earth more quickly than ever before.</p>
					<p>“It is your turn now,” ordered the officer, when Pascale, the professor, had fallen.</p>
					<p>True, I had not been caught in any wrongdoing, and there was nothing to kill me for. But can you argue with them? And so I stood up. And I lamented the night. Do you understand me? the night! Here the torches and the fires were ruining it, and there, behind the torches and the fire, it stood out strong, and firm, and dark as the nights of my youth. I love the night, for then I do not see myself and can think what I will. The day reaches my garments, but can go no further. It stops at the darkness of my body and turns blind. But the night reaches my very heart. That is why it is so easy to love at night; anybody will tell you that. Ah, to spend only one hour in the shade of the faithful, of the black and beautiful night, only one hour. But can you argue with them? So I stood up.</p>
					<p>But it is well to love also in the day time, when the sun is shining. Love itself is like the night, it reaches the heart, don’t you see. And in love you fail to see your own self, even as in the midst of night. And if you only look into its eyes⁠—straight into its black eyes⁠—and look without tearing your gaze away. …</p>
					<p>Suddenly for some reason the officer shouted angrily at the soldier and snapped at me:</p>
					<p>“Get out of here!”</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-14" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIV</h4>
					<p>Another day passed. And on that day the soldiers shot that youngster who had called me father.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-15" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XV</h4>
					<p>Night sank upon the earth and I departed from that city of the dead.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-16" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVI</h4>
					<p>Dies irae⁠—the day of wrath, the day of vengeance and of stern retribution, the day of Horror and of Death.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-17" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVII</h4>
					<p>… That procession which I had watched from behind the wall was a strange and a terrible sight. They were bearing the statues of their saints, but did not know whether to raise them still higher over their heads or to cast them upon the ground, trampling the fragments underfoot. Some were still cursing, while others were already saying their prayers, but they walked on together, the children of the same father and the same mother, or Horror and of Death. They leaped over the crevices and disappeared in abysses. And the saints reeled like drunkards.</p>
					<p>Dies irae. … Some were singing, others were weeping, and still others were laughing. Some howled like lunatics. And they were waving their hands, and all were in a hurry. The fat-bellied monks were running. From whom were they running away? Not a soul was seen behind them. Meekly lolled the ruins in the warm glow of the sun, and the fire was disappearing into the ground, smoking wearily.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-18" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVIII</h4>
					<p>From whom were they fleeing? There was not a soul behind them.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-19" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIX</h4>
					<p>You barely touched a tree, and a ripe orange fell at your feet. First one, then another, a third. … The crop bids fair to be fine. A good orange is like a little sun, and when there is an abundance of them, you feel like smiling, as though the sun shone brightly. And the leaves are so dark, just like the night back of the sun. No, they are green, dark green. Why are you telling untruths, Geronimo?</p>
					<p>But how cautious is that deaf devil, that subterranean trumpeter, who is never content because of his deafness: he has destroyed a city, but has left an orange suspended on a branch, to wait for Geronimo. You barely touch the tree, and a ripe orange drops at your feet. First one, then another, then a third. … They will be taken overseas to strange lands. And in those lands, where reign the cold and the fogs, people will look at them and say: “Yes, there is a sun for you!”</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-20" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XX</h4>
					<p>Pascale, the professor⁠—we called him “<i xml:lang="it">il professore</i>” because he was so wise, he could write verses, and he discoursed so nobly on all sorts of subjects. He is dead.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-21" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXI</h4>
					<p>Why am I terrified? Why do I walk faster and faster? I had been afraid there. …</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-22" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXII</h4>
					<p>I never knew that my feet so loved to walk. They love every step which they make. They part so sadly with every step; they seem to want to turn back. And so greedy are they that the longest road seems short to them, that the widest road seems narrow. They regret⁠—fancy!⁠—that they cannot at once walk backward and forward, to the right and to the left. Let them have their will and they will cover the earth with their traces, not leaving a patch: and still they would seek more.</p>
					<p>And another thing I did not know: I did not know about my eyes that they can breathe.</p>
					<p>Afar off I see the ocean.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-23" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIII</h4>
					<p>What else can I tell you? I was seized by the gendarmes.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-24" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIV</h4>
					<p>Once more thou hast locked the doors of my prison, O Man! When didst thou have time to build it? Still in ruins lies thy house, the bones of thy children are not yet bare in the grave, but thou art already at work, tapping with thy hammer, patching together with cement the obedient stone, rearing before thy face the obedient iron. How fast dost thou build thy prisons, O Man!</p>
					<p>Still in ruins are thy churches, but thy prison is all finished.</p>
					<p>Still shaking with terror are thy hands, but already they grasp the key, and rattle the lock, and slip the bolt. Thou art a musician: to the jingle of gold thou requirest the accompanying rattle of fetters⁠—let that be the bass.</p>
					<p>Grim death is still in thy blanched nostrils, and already thou art sniffing at something, turning thy nose this way and that way. How fast buildest thou thy prisons, O Man!</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-25" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXV</h4>
					<p>The iron does not even rattle⁠—so strong it is. And it is cold to the touch like someone’s icy heart. Silent is also the stone of the walls⁠—so proud it is, so everlasting and mighty. At the appointed time comes the jailer and flings at me my food like at a savage beast. And I show my teeth⁠—why should I not show my teeth? I am starved and naked. And the clock is striking.</p>
					<p>Art thou content, O Man, my master?</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-26" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVI</h4>
					<p>But I do not believe in thy prison, O Man, my master! I do not believe in thy iron; I do not believe in thy stone, in thy power, O Man, my master! That which I have once seen destroyed, shall never be knit together again.</p>
					<p>Thus would have spoken even Pascale, the professor.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-27" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVII</h4>
					<p>Set thy clock a-going, it marks well the time until it stops. Rattle thy keys, for even thy paradise thou hast shut with lock and key. Rattle thy keys and shut the door, they shut well while there is a door. And walk around cautiously.</p>
					<p>And when all is still, thou wilt say: it is well now, it is quite still now. And thou wilt lie down to sleep. It is quite still now, thou wilt say, but I hear how he is gnawing at the iron with his teeth. But thou wilt say that the iron is too strong for him, and thou wilt lie down to sleep. And when thou hast fallen asleep, holding tight thy keys in thy happy hands, suddenly the subterranean trumpeter will roar out loudly, awaking thee with his thunder, raising thee to thy feet with the force of terror, holding thee erect with a mighty arm: so that dying thou shalt see death. Wide as the day will open thy eyes; terror will tear them wide open. Ears will come to thy heart, so that dying thou shalt hear death.</p>
					<p>And thy clock will stop.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="dies-irae-2-28" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVIII</h4>
					<p>Freedom!</p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
