<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Foreword</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="foreword" epub:type="foreword z3998:editorial-note">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Foreword</h2>
			<p>This edition of Leonid Andreyev’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Short Fiction</i> was produced from various translations. “The Red Laugh” was translated by Alexandra Linden and originally published in 1905. “The Seven Who Were Hanged” was translated by Herman Bernstein and originally published in 1909. “A Dilemma” was translated by John Cournos and originally published in 1910. “The Wall” was translated by <abbr class="name">W. H.</abbr> Lowe and also originally published in 1910. “The Crushed Flower”, “A Story Which Will Never Be Finished”, “On the Day of the Crucifixion”, “Love, Faith and Hope”, “The Ocean”, and “The Man Who Found the Truth” were also translated by Herman Bernstein and originally published in 1916. “The Little Angel”, “At the Roadside Station”, “Snapper”, “The Lie”, “An Original”, “Petka at the Bungalow”, “Silence”, “Laughter”, “The Friend”, “In the Basement”, “The City”, “The Tocsin”, “Bargamot and Garaska”, “Men May Rise on Stepping-Stones of Their Dead Selves to Higher Things” and “The Spy” were also translated by <abbr class="name">W. H.</abbr> Lowe and also originally published in 1916. “A Present”, “The Giant” and “The Story of the Snake” were translated by <i epub:type="se:name.publiation.magazine">The Russian Review</i> and also originally published in 1916. “The Confessions of a Little Man During Great Days” was translated by <abbr class="name">R. S.</abbr> Townsend and originally published in 1917. “When the King Loses His Head”, “Judas Iscariot”, “Lazarus”, “Life of Father Vassily”, “The Marseillaise” and “Dies Irae” were translated by Archibald <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Wolfe and originally published in 1919. “His Excellency the Governor” was translated by Maurice Magnus and originally published in 1921. “The Dark the Governor” was translated by <abbr class="name">L. A.</abbr> Magnus and <abbr class="name">K.</abbr> Walter, and originally published in 1922.</p>
			<footer>
				<p>Robin Whittleton</p>
				<p>Malmö, Sweden, 2019</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
