<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Laughter</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="laughter" epub:type="volume se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Laughter</h2>
			<section id="laughter-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>At 6:30 I was certain that she would come, and I was desperately happy. My coat was fastened only by the top button, and fluttered in the cold wind; but I felt no cold. My head was proudly thrown back, and my student’s cap was cocked on the back of my head; my eyes with respect to the men they met were expressive of patronage and boldness, with respect to the women of a seductive tenderness. Although she had been my only love for four whole days, I was so young, and my heart was so rich in love, that I could not remain perfectly indifferent to other women. My steps were quick, bold and free.</p>
				<p>At 6:45 my coat was fastened by two buttons, and I looked only at the women, but no longer with a seductive tenderness, but rather with disgust. I only wanted <em>one</em> woman⁠—the others might go to the devil; they only confused me, and with their seeming resemblance to Her gave to my movements an uncertain and jerky indecision.</p>
				<p>At 6:55 I felt warm.</p>
				<p>At 6:58 I felt cold.</p>
				<p>As it struck seven I was convinced that she would not come.</p>
				<p>By 8:30 I presented the appearance of the most pitiful creature in the world. My coat was fastened with all its buttons, collar turned up, cap tilted over my nose, which was blue with cold; my hair was over my forehead, my moustache and eyelashes were whitening with rime, and my teeth gently chattered. From my shambling gait, and bowed back, I might have been taken for a fairly hale old man returning from a party at the almshouse.</p>
				<p>And She was the cause of all this⁠—She!</p>
				<p>“Oh, the Dev⁠⸺! No, I won’t. Perhaps she could not get away, or she is ill, or dead. She’s dead!”⁠—and I swore.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="laughter-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>“Eugenia Nikolaevna will be there to-night,” one of my companions, a student, remarked to me, without the slightest <i xml:lang="fr">arrière pensée.</i> He could not know how that I had waited for her in the frost from seven to half-past eight.</p>
				<p>“Indeed,” I replied, as in deep thought, but within my soul there leapt out: “Oh, the Dev!” “There” meant at the Polozovs’ evening party. Now the Polozovs were people with whom I was not upon visiting terms. But this evening I would be there.</p>
				<p>“You fellows!” I shouted cheerfully, “to-day is Christmas Day, when everybody enjoys himself. Let us do so too.”</p>
				<p>“But how?” one of them mournfully replied.</p>
				<p>“And where?” continued another.</p>
				<p>“We will dress up, and go round to all the evening parties,” I decided.</p>
				<p>And these insensate individuals actually became cheerful. They shouted, leapt, and sang. They thanked me for my suggestion, and counted up the amount of “the ready” available. In the course of half an hour we had collected all the lonely, disconsolate students in town; and when we had recruited a cheerful dozen or so of leaping devils, we repaired to a hair-dresser’s⁠—he was also a costumier⁠—and let in there the cold, and youth, and laughter.</p>
				<p>I wanted something sombre and handsome, with a shade of elegant sadness; so I requested:</p>
				<p>“Give me the dress of a Spanish grandee.”</p>
				<p>Apparently this grandee had been very tall, for I was altogether swallowed up in his dress, and felt there as absolutely alone as though I had been in a wide, empty hall. Getting out of this costume, I asked for something else.</p>
				<p>“Would you like to be a clown? Motley with bells.”</p>
				<p>“A clown, indeed!” I exclaimed with contempt.</p>
				<p>“Well, then, a bandit. Such a hat and dagger!”</p>
				<p>Oh! dagger! Yes, that would suit my purpose. But unfortunately the bandit whose clothes they gave me had scarcely grown to full stature. Most probably he had been a corrupt youth of eight years. His little hat would not cover the back of my head, and I had to be dragged out of his velvet breeks as out of a trap. A page’s dress was no go: it was all spotted like the pard. The monk’s cowl was all in holes.</p>
				<p>“Look sharp; it’s late,” said my companions, who were already dressed, trying to hurry me up.</p>
				<p>There was but one costume left⁠—that of a distinguished Chinaman. “Give me the Chinaman’s,” said I with a wave of my hand. And they gave it me. It was the devil knows what! I am not speaking of the costume itself. I pass over in silence those idiotic flowered boots, which were too short for me, and reached only half-way to my knees; but in the remaining, by far the most essential part, stuck out like two incomprehensible adjuncts on either side of my feet. I say nothing of the pink rag which covered my head like a wig, and was tied by threads to my ears, so that they protruded and stood up like a bat’s. But the mask!</p>
				<p>It was, if one may use the expression, a face <em>in the abstract.</em>. It had nose, eyes, and mouth all right enough, and all in the proper places; but there was nothing human about it. A human being could not look so placid⁠—even in his coffin. It was expressive neither of sorrow, nor cheerfulness, nor surprise⁠—it expressed absolutely nothing! It looked at you squarely, and placidly⁠—and an uncontrollable laughter overwhelmed you. My companions rolled about on the sofas, sank impotently down on the chairs, and gesticulated.</p>
				<p>“It will be the most original mask of the evening,” they declared.</p>
				<p>I was ready to weep; but no sooner did I glance in the mirror than I too was convulsed with laughter. Yes, it will be a most original mask!</p>
				<p>“In no circumstances are we to take off our masks,” said my companions on the way. “We will give our word.”</p>
				<p>“Honour bright!”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="laughter-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>Positively it was the most original mask. People followed me in crowds, turned me about, jostled me, pinched me. But when, harried, I turned on my persecutors in anger⁠—uncontrollable laughter seized them. Wherever I went, a roaring cloud of laughter encompassed and pressed on me; it moved together with me, and I could not escape from this circle of mad mirth. Sometimes it seized even myself, and I shouted, sang, and danced till everything seemed to go round before me, as if I was drunk. But how remote everything was from me! And how solitary was I under that mask! At last they left me in peace. With anger and fear, with malice and tenderness intermingling, I looked at her.</p>
				<p>“ ’Tis I.”</p>
				<p>Her long eyelashes were lifted slowly in surprise, and a whole sheaf of black rays flashed upon me, and a laugh, resonant, joyous, bright as the spring sunshine⁠—a laugh answered me.</p>
				<p>“Yes, it is I; I, I say,” I insisted with a smile. “Why did you not come this evening?”</p>
				<p>But she only laughed, laughed joyously.</p>
				<p>“I suffered so much; I felt so hurt,” said I, imploring an answer.</p>
				<p>But she only laughed. The black sheen of her eyes was extinguished, and still more brightly her smile lit up. It was the sun indeed, but burning, pitiless, cruel.</p>
				<p>“What’s the matter with you?”</p>
				<p>“Is it really you?” said she, restraining herself. “How comical you are!”</p>
				<p>My shoulders were bowed, and my head hung down⁠—such despair was there in my pose. And while she, with the expiring afterglow of the smile upon her face, looked at the happy young couples that hurried by us, I said: “It’s not nice to laugh. Do you not feel that there is a living, suffering face behind my ridiculous mask⁠—and can’t you see that it was only for the opportunity it gave me of seeing you that I put it on? You gave me reason to hope for your love, and then so quickly, so cruelly deprived me of it. Why did you not come?”</p>
				<p>With a protest on her tender, smiling lips, she turned sharply to me, and a cruel laugh utterly overwhelmed her. Choking, almost weeping, covering her face with a fragrant lace handkerchief, she brought out with difficulty: “Look at yourself in the mirror behind. Oh, how droll you are!”</p>
				<p>Contracting my brows, clenching my teeth with pain, with a face grown cold, from which all the blood had fled, I looked at the mirror. There gazed out at me an idiotically placid, stolidly complacent, inhumanly immovable face. And I burst into an uncontrollable fit of laughter. And with the laughter not yet subsided, but already with the trembling of rising anger, with the madness of despair, I said⁠—nay, almost shouted:</p>
				<p>“You ought not to laugh!”</p>
				<p>And when she was quiet again I went on speaking in a whisper of my love. I had never spoken so well, for I had never loved so strongly. I spoke of the tortures of expectation, of the venomous tears of mad jealousy and grief, of my own soul which was all love. And I saw how her drooping eyelashes cast thick dark shadow over her blanched cheeks. I saw how across their dull pallor the fire, bursting into flame, threw a red reflection, and how her whole pliant body involuntarily bent towards me.</p>
				<p>She was dressed as the Goddess of Night, and was all mysterious, clad in a black, mist-like face, which twinkled with stars of brilliants. She was beautiful as a forgotten dream of far-off childhood. As I spoke my eyes filled with tears, and my heart beat with gladness. And I perceived, I perceived at last, how a tender, piteous smile parted her lips, and her eyelashes were lifted all a-tremble. Slowly, timorously, but with infinite confidence, she turned her head towards me, and⁠—</p>
				<p>And such a shriek of laughter I never heard!</p>
				<p>“No, no, I can’t,” she almost groaned, and throwing back her head, she burst into a resonant cascade of laughter.</p>
				<p>Oh, if but for a moment I could have had a human face! I bit my lips, tears rolled over my heated face; but it⁠—that idiotic mask, on which everything was in its right place, nose, eyes, and lips⁠—looked with a complacency staidly horrible in its absurdity. And when I went out, swaying on my flowered feet, it was long before I got out of reach of that ringing laugh. It was as though a silvery stream of water were falling from an immense height, and breaking in cheerful song upon the hard rock.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="laughter-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>Scattered over the whole sleeping street and rousing the stillness of the night with our lusty, excited voices, we walked home. A companion said to me:</p>
				<p>“You have had a colossal success. I never saw people laugh so Halloa! what are you up to? Why are you tearing your mask? I say, you fellows, he’s gone mad! Look, he’s tearing his costume to pieces! By Jove! he’s actually crying.”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
